\subsubsection{X-Axis: Horizontal Duplication}

The x-axis of the cube of the scalability is concerned with the horizontal
duplication and cloning with absolutely no bias, running each identical copy of
the system on a different server. Usually, the work is distributed by a load
balancer.

Reasoning on the x-axis is typically easy and the implementation can be fast,
but the data sets have to be replicated in their entirety which increases
operational costs.

% descrivere un esempio virtuoso fuori dall'architettura di Ethereum
In order to better understand the concept, we bring an example of a common
architecture which scales on this axis. Suppose you are running your own
e-commerce startup of wine. The business is going great and suddenly you have to
face the explosive growth of HTTP requests to your server. Since you have an
early stage startup, so far you had only a single server running on a single
machine, but you know that, if everything goes as hoped, you cannot scale-up for
a long time. So, you decide to take you Web server codebase and deploy an
identical copy of it. Right after, you set up
nginx\footnote{\url{http://nginx.org/}} as HTTP load balancer. The two Web
servers now work in parallel and access the same database, thanks to your
ability to write \emph{stateless} servers. The statelessness is an important
property in this scenario, it avoids dependency between requests, that is
the server can process a request without needing to access the information of
another one. In the example, if you would not have written a stateless server
(i.e. stateful), one request arrived at one of the two servers could be the ones
on which another request being processing on the other server depends on, hence
without permitting to successfully fulfill the latter.

% discutere sui mining pool

% discutere su Infura